They're the tunes you've probably
heard once or twice.
But never quite like this.
(DESPACITO BY LUIS FONSI IN IRISH)
(CHEERLEADER BY OMI IN IRISH)
(WAKE ME UP BY AVICII IN IRISH)
Yeah, singing along
to these guys' covers
might be a little trickier than usual
because they're singing them all
in Irish Gaelic!
(SONG CONTINUES)
Irish Gaelic,
or just Irish as they call it,
is the first official language
of the Republic of Ireland.
You see, up until the 18th century
it was the main language
spoken throughout the country.
But, over time, English took over
and Irish started to die out.
(ALL SPEAK IN IRISH)
These days it's not spoken
in many areas.
And while lots of students
still learn it at school,
they mostly speak English
as their first language.
It is going down.
Not as many people speak it anymore.
Lots of people are worried that
if something isn't done now
to save it,
the language could be lost for good.
That's where these guys come in.
They're part of a special
summer school program
in the Galway Gaeltacht,
one of the last places in Ireland
where Irish is still spoken
as a first language.
I'm bilingual but I am more
comfortable in the Irish language.
Everybody that I know speaks Irish,
so I speak Irish
probably 80% of the time.
The program is all about taking
famous songs
and translating them into Irish.
They then make their own music videos
and upload them onto YouTube,
where they've racked up
millions of views.
(SINGS IN IRISH GAELIC)
Each year we get
more and more ambitious
and try and make them
better and bigger.
It's such a great feeling
to see the videos
been so popular on YouTube
because we worked so hard on them
during the three weeks
and to see such a good reaction
from the public just makes everyone
feel so great about it.
These guys reckon making Irish
more popular is really important
and they're hoping that their videos
will encourage those
with Irish blood in their veins to
start using the language once again.
It's a great opportunity
for teenagers to socialise
with teenagers from around
the country,
while also engaging
with the Irish language.
I think these music videos
really encourage other young people
to speak in Irish.
My sister herself struggles a lot
with the spoken language
and when she sees me and my brothers
in these videos,
she just takes it upon herself
to learn them
and then asks me
what these different words mean.
Then it just has her kind of
know the language herself then.
(HELLO BY ADELE)
These guys say they're proud
to be doing their part
to help this historical language
live on.